# What's new in babel 3.61

2021-06-28

## Danda

_Only LuaLaTex._

In Indic scripts danda and doble danda must be kept with the preceding
text even if a space is inserted. The ‘transform’ `danda.nobreak`
prevents this break.

This transform is available for Assamese, Bengali, Gujarati, Hindi,
Kannada, Malayalam, Marathi, Oriya, Tamil, Telugu.

## Improvements in Arabic justification

_Only LuaLaTex._

Kashida is disabled in horizontal boxes with internal infinite
stretching and fixed width.

With this addition, Arabic justification is
usable in many cases, as the example for Arabic in the repository shows
([tex](https://github.com/latex3/babel/blob/main/samples/lua-arabic.tex),
[pdf](https://github.com/latex3/babel/blob/main/samples/lua-arabic.pdf)).
Remember, however, the interface may change slightly in the future.

There are still many messages of underfull boxes generated by the
internal calculations. There are other things to be sorted out, like the
‘long’ kaf with elongated forms (with swash variants), and font based
declarations.

## Multiple `\babelprovide`’s

`\babelprovide` was not quite well behaved when applied several times
for the same language. It was originally meant for a single call and
the subsequent ones worked in many cases but not all. This version
improves the situation so that almost any change done by means of ini
keys (for example, `typography/frenchspacing`) should work. There are
many keys performing very diverse tasks, so very likely some of them
doesn’t still work exactly as expected, but it will fine tuned in the
following versions, and guide [Using `\babelprovide` to modify or
extend
locales](../guides/using-babelprovide-to-modify-or-extend-locales.md)
will be extended accordingly.

## Fixes

There is a partial fix for the `\write` issue with `\selectlanguage`.
See [\selectlanguage pushes section to new
page](https://github.com/latex3/babel/issues/114).

Although the fix is not perfect and it can even lead to some problems,
these must be less frequent than the two bugs described in the linked
issue. I'm investigating how to improve the way `babel` communicates
with the `aux` file, including also [this
issue](https://github.com/latex3/babel/issues/108), which is far from
trivial.

Another fixed bug is #129 (\shorthandoff*{^} causes error for \section
command).


